VALORANT is a tactical FPS by Riot Games, combining precise gunplay with unique agent abilities in a strategic 5v5 format. The VALORANT Champions Tour (VCT) is the official esports league for the game, featuring regional qualifiers, leagues, and culminating in a global championship.

Valorant Game Changers is a series of domestic competitions for women and other marginalized genders within Valorant esports. Teams that finish in top places qualify for the Valorant Game Changers Championship, the world championship event of Game Changers, and also earn the chance to be promoted to their region's Challengers league.
Players in Game Changers are considered game changers.

Non-partner teams compete in Challengers events of sub-regions in Americas, EMEA and Pacific to qualify for "Ascension", the yearly promotion event to the respective International Leagues.
In 2023-24, there are 23 minor regional leagues across the three international territories.
Players in VCT Challengers are considered semi-professionals.


As of 2023, 30 teams are selected to be partner teams in International Leagues for five years with 10 teams per region. Non-partner teams compete in many sub-regions of Challengers events to qualify for "Ascension" events. The Ascension events will have one winner per region, which earns them a two-year promotion into their regions' International League. The promoted teams will have a chance to qualify for the global tournaments (Masters and Champions), as well as get benefits provided to other partnered teams. Each year through the Challengers promotion system, the three International Leagues will expand by one team each, until they reach a cap of 12 teams in each region in 2025 (beforehand this was supposed to be a 14-team cap by 2027).

Teams in each International League will play on LAN in a centralized local: the Riot Games Arena in Los Angeles for VCT Americas, Riot Games Arena in Berlin for VCT EMEA, and Seoul for VCT Pacific.
Players in VCT International are considered professionals.